---
title: 'py-tofspec: A Python package for time of flight spectrometry and chemical speciation'
tags:
  - Python
  - cheminformatics
  - mass spectrometry
  - RDKit
  - 
authors:
  - name: Joe Palmo
    equal-contrib: true
    affiliation: 1 # (Multiple affiliations must be quoted)
  - name: David Hagan
    equal-contrib: true # (This is how you can denote equal contributions between multiple authors)
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Jordan Krechmer
    corresponding: true # (This is how to denote the corresponding author)
    affiliation: 2
affiliations:
 - name: QuantAQ, Inc., USA
   index: 1
 - name: Aerodyne Research Institute, USA
   index: 2
date: 27 July 2022
bibliography: paper.bib

---

# Summary  
Proton transfer reaction time-of-flight mass spectrometry (PTR-TOF-MS) is the current state-of-the-art method for real-time monitoring of volatile organic compounds (VOCs). VOCs are a broad and ubiquitous class of molecules, and accurate VOC measurements may be leveraged across many disciplines such as atmospheric chemistry, soil science, metabolomics, and public health. Certain VOCs are hazardous compounds that may cause adverse health effects for humans with chronic exposure. Other VOCs mark biological or microbial behavior within a system. Operating a PTR-TOF-MS, and most other VOC-analyzers, is costly and requires specialized training. This presents the need to develop a low-cost method for making targeted measurements of certain functional classes of VOCs ([Meredith:2022]). 

 **ADD REFERENCES FOR EACH**

# Statement of Need

The purpose of `py-tofspec` is to make it easier to process and label proton transfer reaction time-of-flight (PTR-TOF) mass spectrometry data. The raw datasets generated by PTR-TOF-MS instruments are extremely high-dimensional matrices. They consist of ion count values in ultrafine m/z bins, usually output at a resolution of a second or less. The richness of this dataset provides us measurements of countless VOCs, but to disentangle the matrix and understand what exactly is going on in the sample is no small feat. We provide functionality for this purpose. Using a few simple steps, `py-tofspec` transforms raw PTR-TOF-MS data into an integrated, labeled time-series of functional groups / substructures that can be analyzed and compared against one another. Key ratios and new metrics emerge naturally between functional groups during an experiment. `py-tofspec` delivers not only a useful summary of the chemistry within a PTR-TOF-MS sample but also a labeled dataset that may be used for building machine learning models and making powerful visualizations.  

`py-tofspec` is the first python package  We hope that `py-tofspec` will be leveraged across disciplines such as atmospheric chemistry, soil science, metabolomics, and public health. 

`py-tofspec` was designed to be used by researchers to develop new low-cost sensor technology that 

# Citations

# Acknowledgements

This work was supported by the NSF XXXXXXX

# References